---
layout: design
title: VecTcl
subtitle: "Implementation details: The vexpr expression compiler"
downloads: false
design: true
---

### vexpr, the Tcl level compiler and execution engine
Using the commands in the `numarray` ensemble, it is possible to perform computations on numerical
arrays in prefix form:
{% highlight tcl %}
{% raw %}
set a {1 2 3}
set c [numarray neg [numarray * 2 [numarray + $a {4 5 6}]]]
{% endraw %}
{% endhighlight %}
But most mathematics is actually better expressed in infix form; the above sequence of commands is
equal to 
{% highlight tcl %}
{% raw %}
vexpr {
	a={1 2 3}
	c=-2*(a+{4 5 6})
}
{% endraw %}
{% endhighlight %}
Of course, both forms can be freely mixed, there is no perceived distinction at the script level between variables
accessed and modified within a `vexpr` or outside. Therefore `vexpr` can be used in inline form
similar to `expr`
{% highlight tcl %}
{% raw %}
set c [vexpr {-2*(a+{4 5 6})}]
{% endraw %}
{% endhighlight %}
or as a self-standing command with a longer sequence of statements.
The language is quite complete and supports not only simple assignments, but [loops and
conditions as well.]({{ site.baseurl}}/tutorial.html)

The expression handed over to `vexpr` is compiled into the prefix form using a compiler based on 
[the small, but clever example compiler from the wiki by Donal Fellows](http://wiki.tcl.tk/39011). The
resulting Tcl code is not evaluated directly, but put into a proc under the namespace numarray. For
every variable that is accessed in the expression, the compiler emits an `upvar` instruction so as
to access the variable in the callers scope. 

Thus, the above `vexpr` is equivalent to
{% highlight tcl %}
{% raw %}
proc numarray::compiledexpressionXX {} {
	upvar 1 a a
	upvar 1 c c
	set a {1 2 3}
	set c [numarray::neg [numarray::* 2 [numarray::+ [set a] {4 5 6}]]]
}
numarray::compiledexpressionXX
{% endraw %}
{% endhighlight %}
where XX denotes a sequence number.  `vexpr`
maintains a cache of compiled expressions in a dict and compiles every expression only once. For
repeated invocation of the same expression, merely the associated proc is invoked via uplevel.

Loops, branches and function calls are translated to their Tcl equivalent. The execution under the
numarray namespace ensures that the commands contained there appear as built-in functions, but any
Tcl proc can be called as a function. This ensures compatibility on the command level, without the 
need for special commands or syntax to extend the math language. As a
performance improvement,`vproc` allows to create a Tcl proc entirely defined by a single `vexpr`program. The
only difference is that the compiler doesn't emit upvar instructions for the local variables, and
that the `vexpr` call itself is circumvented. 

### Comparison to expr

Since `vexpr` is a functional superset of `expr`, most expressions which are executed by `expr` should
run within `vexpr` and produce the same results. Apart from the obvious differences that vexpr
handles complex numbers and multi-component values, there are a few syntactic differences, which
should briefly by explained in the following paragraphs.

#### The case with $
`expr` requires variable references to be prefixed with `$`, while `vexpr` expects the variable names
are bare words. This choice is mostly due to the belief of the VecTcl author, that the `$` in `expr` is
largely a historic relict from the times when `expr` was used with unbraced expressions and the Tcl
interpreter had to substitute the string value for a variable.
Today, passing an unbraced expression or multiple arguments 
to `expr` is considered bad style, and the `$` is still required but technically not needed anymore in most cases. 
Since the `$` is
used to indicate value substitution, it would also be irritating in case of assignments. `$a=$b`
as an assignment looks odd to the eye of the Tcl programmer (in contrast to, e.g., Perl or PHP).
The `$` could optionally be supported for the right hand side of expressions. This is currently not implemented,
but will be useful especially to access variables with odd names. Currently, neither variables
with spaces in it can be referenced in VecTcl nor array elements, since the array syntax collides
with the syntax for calling a function. These cases could be disambiguated by allowing quoted syntax
such as `${a(2)}` to refer to an array element. The exact substitution rules inside such a braced
expression is yet to be defined, such that both odd names containing spaces and metacharacters, as
well as array elements with variable indices can be referred to. Further it needs to be defined, how
variables can be accessed using this syntax on the left hand side of an assignment. 

#### Command substitution using \[\]
Inside `expr`, command substitution using the square brackes is used to call out Tcl
procs. In VecTcl, no special syntax is needed to call a Tcl proc, because VecTcl makes no
distinction between a math function and a Tcl proc. The special `expr` syntax is likewise believed to be a
historic relict, coming from the way that command substitution is handled within Tcl. Inside the
brackets usual Tcl substitution rules apply. That leads to the consequence, that computed arguments
to such a function itself require another nested `expr` call, leading to verbose and hard to read
code. For instance, to extract twice the element with index $$2n+1$$ from a list using lindex
{% highlight tcl %}
{% raw %}
set te [expr {2*[lindex $l [expr {2*$n+1}]]}]
{% endraw %}
{% endhighlight %}
is needed, whereas using VecTcl, the same code can be compressed to 
{% highlight tcl %}
{% raw %}
vexpr {te=2*lindex(l,2*n+1)}
{% endraw %}
{% endhighlight %}
Such code is not uncommon for index calculations. To remedy this issue, [an internal treatment of
simple offsets](http://www.tcl.tk/cgi-bin/tct/tip/176.html)
has been incorporated into `lindex` and similar commands. 
The issue can be solved in a more general way by allowing for any Tcl
command to be part of a math expression. 

#### Strings
`expr` supports arbitrary string values for operators which have a useful definition for general
strings. For example, strings are allowed as the result of the ternary operator `?:` or input to the
comparison operators. Further, additional operators are defined to test if a string is contained 
within a given list. Inside literal double-quoted strings, again the full range of Tcl
substitutions (including nested command substitution) is supported. VecTcl, on the other hand, does
not support strings at the current stage. NumArrays can not be defined on lists of general strings as
elemental values. The reason is that elemental values must be free of whitespace, otherwise the
dimensionality of the values can't be unambiguously derived from the string representation. This is
a requirement of EIAS, and unless some additional restriction is posed onto the elemental values such as obligatory
quoting, arrays of strings are impossible.
Passing literal strings or variables containing general strings to functions, on the other hand,
poses no such problems. The current implementation supports the latter string containing variables, as long as
they are not accessed using NumArray functions or operators. The former embedded literal strings are currently
not supported, but will make a good companion to enable calling commands with non-numerical arguments, 
most notably ensemble subcommands. It is open
to discussion, how much of Tcls substitution syntax should be enabled within these strings, whether just
literal strings should be allowed, or variable and command substitution as in `expr`.

Under the assumption that strings are implemented, VecTcl would provide a
complete alternative syntax to the Tcl interpreter. For instance, this program shows how a
dictionary could be unfolded into local variable names from within `vexpr`
{% highlight tcl %}
{% raw %}
vproc dict_inflate {d} {
	for key=dict("keys", d) {
		upvar("1", key, "var")
		var = dict("get", d, key)
	}
}
{% endraw %}
{% endhighlight %}

Of course it is not recommended to program in this style, but such an exercise demonstrates, that
the drafted language inside `vexpr` is quite complete and scalable. The programming style can vary
smoothly from a style similar to `expr`, where only a single expression is passed and the result further
processed by Tcl code, over multiple assignments and expressions with loops into a full-blown
alternative scripting language, which only shares the runtime execution engine with Tcl. This
scalability accounts for the fact that some code, notably heavily numerical code, is best
expressed within an expression-oriented language as provided by VecTcl, whereas other pieces of
code, most notably string processing, are best performed in a substitution-oriented language such as
Tcl. 


