---
layout: default
title: VecTcl
subtitle: Performance considerations
downloads: false
design: true
---

Performance considerations
--------------------------

### Shimmering performance
Due to the way the grammar is defined, a value to be interpreted as a NumArray must be parsed
recursively down to the level of individual elements at the moment of shimmering, i.e. in the
setFromAnyProc. At this moment, it must accept every possible number of dimensions or data type.
Since numerical objects can be very large, the setFromAnyProc tries to perform the conversion
without triggering a string representation. This is done by looking into the `typePtr` field of the
Tcl\_Obj representing the input value, before attempting to fetch the value using Tcl\_GetFooFromObj().
Only if the `typePtr` can neither be read as an integer,
double, complex, or list type, the string representation is examined. A pure sequence of
Tcl\_GetFooFromObj() is insufficient to prevent the string conversion, possibly multiple times,
especially when non-core numeric datatypes like complex values or NumArray slices are involved. 
Therefore, the efficiency of converting a pure list of doubles into NumArray is dependent on the
fact that the core datatypes `int`, `double`, `list`, are registered using Tcl_RegisterObjType(). An
alternative interface satisfying the needs of NumArray's setFromAnyProc would be a
Tcl_MaybeGetFooFromObj() function which fails if the Tcl\_Obj in question cannot be converted to the
requested value type without triggering a string conversion.

Of equal importance than the conversion of Tcl's native datatypes into NumArray is the other way
round. At some point, the data must leave the internal representation of NumArray. The only official
way to do this is the updateStringProc. But the string representation is not always the final step
in the conversion. If the NumArray is not scalar, then in most cases the code using he result
expects a list, and the generated string representation is just used to parse the values back into a
list. For instance, consider a program which wishes to draw a line on the canvas computed by VecTcl.

{% highlight tcl %}
{% raw %}
# compute a sine wave using VecTcl
vexpr { 
	x=linspace(0,10,1000)
	y=sin(x)*50
	coords = hstack(x*10+100, y+100)
	coords = reshape(coords, 2000)
}
# display on canvas
.c create line $coords
{% endraw %}
{% endhighlight %}

As long as the canvas is not rewritten to understand NumArrays directly,`coords` shimmers via string
to list of doubles. VecTcl contains an experimental feature to enable direct conversion from the
internal representation, enabled by `--enable-listpatch` during compilation. It requires a 
[small patch](https://github.com/auriocus/VecTcl/blob/master/tcl86_vectcl.patch) to the Tcl core to work. 
The patch replaces calls to setListFromAny in the core (single file tclListObj.c) with equivalent
calls to Tcl\_ConvertToType() and removes the const qualifier from the list Tcl\_ObjType. Thus VecTcl
can patch the list Tcl\_ObjType() and wrap the setFromAny proc, such that NumArrays are checked
first. The conversion code constructs a list of scalar values from one-dimensional NumArrays.
Higher-dimensional NumArrays are returned as a list of slices into the original buffer. Thus, a
`lindex` into a matrix with 1000×1000 elements, shimmers the object into a list of 1000 slices, and
the accessed row into a list of 1000 doubles. In contrast, without the patch, it prints a million
doubles into ASCII. A cleaner way to achieve this goal would be, if the core provided a method to
register an optimized myObjTypetoList() function, or even more general, a way to register an A to B
transform. Even the core itself could profit from such an infrastructure, since, e.g., the dict and list 
types are converted circumventing the string representation, by making list and dict
setFromAny know of each other.

### Execution speed of vexpr: Compilation

Compilation speed of vexpr in its current implementation is satisfying. Simple statements compile
faster than a millisecond, and relatively long expressions or programs, such as the integration loop
in [jima's example](http://stevehavelka.com/blog/2014/06/guest-post-vectcl/), take a few
milliseconds to compile
{% highlight tcl %}
{% raw %}
vproc shipTrajectory {} {
    numSteps = 13000
    x = zeros(numSteps + 1, 2); # m
    v = zeros(numSteps + 1, 2); # m/s

    x[0, 0] = 15e6
    x[0, 1] = 1e6
    v[0, 0] = 2e3
    v[0, 1] = 4e3

    for i=0:numSteps-1 {
        a = acceleration(x[i,:])
        v[i+1,0] = v[i,0]+::h*a[0]
        v[i+1,1] = v[i,1]+::h*a[1]
        x[i+1,0] = x[i,0]+::h*v[i,0]
        x[i+1,1] = x[i,1]+::h*v[i,1]
    }
    list(x,v)
}
{% endraw %}
{% endhighlight %}

### Execution speed of a sequence of commands

On the other hand, the execution speed of this code is very slow compared to the clock speed of the
computer. On the same machine on which the [standard benchmarks](benchmarks.html) are performed, it takes 600
milliseconds to integrate the 13,000 steps. When the updates in the inner loop are rewritten in
vector form, the execution speed nearly doubles. This code
{% highlight tcl %}
{% raw %}
v[i+1,:] = v[i,:]+::h*a
x[i+1,:] = x[i,:]+::h*v[i,:]
{% endraw %}
{% endhighlight %}
takes 350 milliseconds to complete 13,000 steps. The main reason for this difference is that the
time for actually performing this computation is insignificant. Calling a C coded command which
doesn't do anything in a for loop many times takes 200 ns per iteration, which is almost 500 times
slower than the clock speed of the machine. The second variant of the code simply runs faster
because it eliminates half of the command calls. To make this kind of code run fast, the speed of the
Tcl bytecode engine will have to be improved, or an alternative backend for the VecTcl compiler must be
sought. Circumventing the Tcl bytecode compiler and directly assembling Tcl bytecodes could solve
certain issues, for instance the stringification of literals, which is currently restricts constant
folding in order to not generate Tcl code consisting mostly of huge literal strings. This is
unlikely to improve performance by a large margin, since scalar values and small literal lists 
are already constant-folded.

One possible alternative implementation could generate code in C, which still calls the same
underlying C commands, but does not dispatch through the Tcl interpreter. Such an implementation 
is within reach with the advent of the [tcc4tcl](https://chiselapp.com/user/rkeene/repository/tcc4tcl)
extension, which can compile C code very fast into memory and execute it from there. Using the
[critcl](https://github.com/andreas-kupries/critcl) extension to compile with an external compiler to disk 
and loading the code from there would lead to much more optimized code, however, for the purposes of
VecTcl this seems impractical because it requires the heavy-weight installation of an external
compiler with all its dependencies. The compilation speed will be orders of magnitude slower and will pay
off only under certain circumstances, and when the source code is transformed into C level loops 
with deeper analysis, instead of a sequence of command dispatches.

### Execution speed of a single NumArray vector command

The execution performance of a VecTcl expression can also be bound by the performance of the
underlying NumArray operations. This is the case, when only a few instructions are performed which
operate on a large number of datapoints simultaneously, such as a long vector or a huge matrix. In
fact, programmers which use languages similar to VecTcl, for instance Matlab or NumPy, often seek to write
their code in this style, which is usually termed _vectorization_, because it generally provides the fastest
programs. Most elemental operations of NumArray already reach the maximum performance, as
evidenced by the [memory benchmark](benchmarks/memcpy.html), where an elemental operation such as
adding two vectors is measured against the speed of memcpy. Memcpy is a very tough competitor, since
it doesn't compute anything while copying the values and is heavily optimized by the compiler.
The benchmark shows, that most of the pointwise operations come close to the memory bandwidth for
vectors, but performance is dependent on the shape of the matrix. A possible improvement on this end
would be the usage of highly optimized linear algebra subroutines (BLAS) such as provided by
[ATLAS](http://math-atlas.sourceforge.net/) or
[Intel MKL](https://software.intel.com/en-us/intel-mkl) for important special cases. This could be done as
a compile-time option, such that the basic package is not unconditionally dependent on these
external libraries. Such a library would also boost performance in some more complex operations like
matrix multiplication and equation solving, and is necessary to be competitive in this end with
other numerical packages. Due to the existence of a standard unified interface, the best available
BLAS could be selected at compile time with little effort in the VecTcl codebase.  Another simple
enhancement which is generally applicable to all internal loops is the use of OpenMP instructions.
OpenMP annotates C code with pragmas which leads to parallelized code from supporting compilers. It
is widely supported and gives parallel execution with very little effort. It should be noted that
these optimizations only come into play with certain length of the operands; from the 
[memory benchmark](benchmarks/memcpy.html) it is evident, that below a size of 10,000 bytes, or
roughly 1,000 floating point values in double precision, the command dispatch takes more time than
the actual computation.

### Execution speed of a single complex expression 

The third type of performance impact on the speed of a compiled expression
can be seen as a mixture of the first two; it arises when a
vectorized expression with large vectors consists of many terms. Consider an expression such as
{% highlight tcl %}
{% raw %}
vexpr {r = a.*a+b.*b }
{% endraw %}
{% endhighlight %}
Each of the subexpressions is evaluated in sequence; the expression is evaluated as if we had
written
{% highlight tcl %}
{% raw %}
vexpr {
	temp1 = a.*a
	temp2 = b.*b
	r = temp1 + temp2
}
{% endraw %}
{% endhighlight %}
This impacts performance in two ways. First, it performs three passes in total over the input data.
Second, if the vectors are sufficiently long, temp1 and temp2 will not remain in the cache of the
CPU and spilled to memory, which leads to high latency when they are added together and in 
consequence many wasted clock cycles, where the CPU just waits for the data from main memory. In
contrast, if we had written the same loop in a compiled language
{% highlight c %}
{% raw %}
for (int i=0; i<N; i++) {
	r[i] = a[i]*a[i] + b[i]*b[i]
}
{% endraw %}
{% endhighlight %}
This code does only one pass over the data. It can load the operands a[i] and b[i] in parallel and
does not cause cache misses, and all intermediate values are held in a register.  Therefore, this
code should execute at least 2-3 times faster than the version above. This speed bottleneck is
really hard to overcome; even compiled languages have suffered from this problem. In fact, C++ was
considered to be "too slow for numerical computation" until some 
[tricky template technique](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Expression_templates) was invented, the main
purpose of which is to move the elementwise expression into the inner loop. One way to tackle this
problem could be the use of _blocking_, that is to break the vector expression into smaller chunks
such that the temporaries still fit into the cache size, and to execute highly optimized fixed-size
code pieces for each chunk. This is the approach taken by, e.g., the [Python numexpr
extension](https://code.google.com/p/numexpr/). Good blocking is also the backbone of fast higher-level
algorithms inside LAPACK and fast BLAS libraries. Another approach could again be the use of code
generation, to generate native machine code using, e.g. tcc4tcl, which executes the loop in one
pass. However this is not likely to be implemented soon, as it requires deeper analysis and
type/dimensionality inference to work. In addition, performance may actually suffer up to a certain
level of complexity of the expression due to the weaker optimization of tcc in comparison to the
native compiler.

The performance improvements suggested in this section all share the nice property, that they can be
implemented within the `vexpr` command without the client code ever noticing, that the compilation
is directed via C into native machine code or bytecode for a blocking expression evaluator. This
comes as a consequence, that `vexpr` accepts the expression as a string due to Tcl's syntax rules
and is in contrast to, e.g. similar solutions in Python, where the expression must be explicitly
supplied as a string or decorated. However, the proposed performance improvements still remain to be 
implemented.


Read more about

{% for p in site.pages %} {% if p.design %}
* {% if page.url == p.url %} {{ p.subtitle }} {% else %} [{{ p.subtitle }}]({{ site.baseurl }}{{ p.url }}) {% endif %} {% endif %} {% endfor %}

