---
layout: default
title: VecTcl
subtitle: Other implementation issues
downloads: false
design: true
---

Other implementation issues
---------------------------

### Parsing nonfinite and complex numbers

The first version of VecTcl used the official API _Tcl_GetDoubleFromObj()_ to (attempt to) extract a
double value from a string. This has proven to be insufficient, because of the handling of the IEEE
not-a-number entity NaN. Therefore, the code for _Tcl\_GetDoubleFromObj()_ was copied from the Tcl core
and modified to pass an IEEE NaN back to the caller.

The current handling of IEEE
non-finite floating point entities is inconsistent in Tcl. While +/-Inf is allowed both as the
result of a computation and as a string format, NaN is not. NaN is correctly translated into a quite
NaN in IEEE format when shimmering to a double value, but taking a NaN out of a double using
_Tcl\_GetDoubleFromObj()_ results in an error. This behaviour is mostly undesirable in a vector
computation. There are different use cases of NaN values. One is to indicate an arithmetically
undefined value, such as dividing by zero or taking the real logarithm of a negative value.
Another case is to deliberately
insert NaNs in a sequence of numbers to indicate missing values. The third is to use it as a debug
tool when writing the software.

In the first two cases, an exception is not
desired as soon as a NaN appears, because all other components of a vector might still contain valid
computation results. A fast function plotter, for instance, could be implemented by an elementwise
vector computation. If we tried to plot the hyperbola
{% highlight tcl %}
{% raw %}
vexpr {
	x= linspace(-1,1,1001)
	y= 1.0/x
}
{% endraw %}
{% endhighlight %}
and a single invalid value would throw an exception instead of producing NaN, the function plotter
would be unable to display the correctly computed 1000 values because of the single NaN in the
cnter. Worse, hitting the exception depends on the exact (bit-for-bit) value of the boundaries of
the plotting interval and number of datapoints. The second use case arises when data are
statistically processed. Sometimes it is convenient to just insert a dummy value, if no value can be
provided, similar to NULL values in relational databases. NaN is an excellent choice, because it is
does not silently convert to a valid value again, which might happen with ad-hoc dummy
values like 0, 1e10 or similar. For the backend implementation, it is convenient because no
additional bits have to be reserved and the execution speed is not impacted by many checks for NULL
values, because NaNs are handled in hardware on IEEE conforming machines. 

While signalling NaNs are useful as a debug tool to locate the point at which a program goes wrong,
they make it harder to do write stable software, because the programmer is forced to wrap an
exception catching block around all expressions, instead of deferring error handling to a later
place. Therefore VecTcl chooses to not signal, when NaN is encountered. For similar reasons,
hardware exceptions on NaN are rarely enabled in compiled programs, since an end-user
program should never crash when an illegal arithmetic value operation is encountered. In order to
debug a program which produces NaN for no obvious reasons, a global switch can be imagined which
enables NaNs to signal an exception. For production use, this switch will likely be turned off in
order to enable exception handling at higher levels, and for each component of a computation
individually. 

Implementing this choice as an extension is challenging. Tcl's internal number parsing function
_TclParseNumber()_ is not exposed, but has a few nice properties that make it very suitable for a
vector extension. Therefore, VecTcl uses the _Tcl\_ConvertToType()_ function to request the value to
shimmer to double, and then extracts the value using the same code copied from
_Tcl\_GetDoubleFromObj()_, modified to pass back NaN without throwing an error. This is quite fragile,
it will break as soon as the NaN handling in the core changes, e.g. if throwing the error migrates
from _Tcl\_GetDoubleFromObj()_ into the setFromAnyProc of the double. 


Read more about

{% for p in site.pages %} {% if p.design %}
* {% if page.url == p.url %} {{ p.subtitle }} {% else %} [{{ p.subtitle }}]({{ site.baseurl }}{{ p.url }}) {% endif %} {% endif %} {% endfor %}

