---
layout: default
title: VecTcl
subtitle: Concluding remarks
downloads: false
design: true
---

Concluding remarks
------------------

VecTcl was designed to be a linear algebra package for Tcl resembling other concepts of Tcl as much
as possible. In contrast to most, if not all, other packages it provides value semantics by
implementing a proper Tcl\_ObjType for the data storage. This has the advantage that other code (Tcl
or C) knowing nothing of VecTcl can use the data directly, though the exchange is more efficient with
adapted packages. Since the values are first-class objects using this approach, the data can be 
passed to and returned from Tcl procs with no additional code involved. Collecting the data in lists
or dicts, returning multiple values from a proc, automatic memory management by the interpreter,
extending the mathematical language by writing a Tcl proc, all of this comes naturally along with
the approach taken by VecTcl.

The overall performance of the current implementation is quite satisfying, especially compared to
[other competing packages for Tcl](benchmarks/linreg.html). In some cases, there is still a large
performance gap to bridge to native code. Some limitations in performance can only be resolved by
compiling to native code. Since the VecTcl language definition is more strict than Tcl itself,
compiling to native code is a feasible task and some experiments will be performed using tcc4tcl as
a JIT backend.

Of equal importance for the overall performance is the shimmering itself, i.e. passing the data back
and forth between VecTcl's internal representation and the Tcl native data types. [The linear
regression benchmark including the setup time](benchmarks/linreg.html) shows that VecTcl beats the
competitors with ease in this field. But reaching this performance requires a few tricks to be played, at least
one of them crossing the border of intruding into the innards of the Tcl core. It would be good, if
the Tcl core, possibly Tcl 9, could provide a clean way to access the necessary bits without dirty
hacks. For a fast vector extension in the spirit of VecTcl, especially a method to examine the type
of the internal representation without causing shimmering would be needed, as well as an analogue to
the updateStringProc which converts a Tcl\_ObjType to a list. Further on the wishlist could be found
extended support for NaNs, exposing all functions which parse and print arithmetic types, maybe
inclusion of the complex number type into the core, and faster command dispatch. 

Read more about

{% for p in site.pages %} {% if p.design %}
* {% if page.url == p.url %} {{ p.subtitle }} {% else %} [{{ p.subtitle }}]({{ site.baseurl }}{{ p.url }}) {% endif %} {% endif %} {% endfor %}

